# AI's Future in Society: Dystopia or Utopia?
*Posted: September ?, 2025*

## Introduction: What effects has AI had on our society?
This blog explores how AI is creating different possibilities of reshaping society and argues that our future depends on the impact of ethics in regulation of AI. During this first half of this decade, we have seen rapid increases in the tasks AI applications, such as Chatgpt, have been able to contribute or complete at exponential levels of skill. Because of this lively progress in skill, it has aided and made huge strides in numerous fields of work. The AlphaFold project by Deepmind has used AI to help predict over 200 million protein shapes. This has further allowed us to develop drugs that have increased the efficiency of treatments. Also, AI is being used more and more in software engineering to generate and review code they construct. For example, Tabnine is an AI tool that supplies code completion and prediction for developers, which is granting these developers substantial amounts of time for more difficult and important tasks. However, critics may argue this could potentially create a skill gap between software engineering professionals. From these breakthroughs, according to McKinsey’s latest State of AI survey, 78 percent of organizations now report using AI in at least one business function—up from 72 percent earlier in that same year and just 55 percent a year before. This demonstrates to people how AI could be worth that risk, as they are pouring millions of pounds into these AI tools for the additional benefits it has on the economic growth of their company. But, will this 'tool' remain at our command? Perhaps there could be a day where AI threatens the existence of the entire human population. We have already seen the negative effects creeping into our society: job displacement, deepfakes and cyberattacks to list a few. There are many discussions between the largest companies and governments recently on how we regulate such a powerful machine while utilising it to its fullest potential. Given AI’s profound impact on our future, this blog will explore how society should approach regulating and controlling AI.

---

## How is Artificial Intelligence affecting the workplace and to what extent do people know how to use this tool at work effectively? 
AI has a long history; however, it has only been in large use since Covid – 19 due to the majority working from home, in turn using computers/devices more. There have been numerous AI tools constructed in the last couple years, like Grammarly go made in 2023. This tool grants users the ability to have AI based editing suggestions, helping them complete their work at a higher standard, all while increasing their efficiency of productivity. Now we will discuss how these tools have affected certain sectors of businesses.
### Marketing
Various fields have massively benefited from the specific applications made with AI at its core. One of the biggest sectors of these is marketing, especially online. On various short clip video feeds in YouTube, TikTok and Instagram, the majority of these advertisement videos are generated by AI. From the company, Zebracat, in a report made by the author, Jenny Ho, who has been in the market industry for around 10 years, suggests that 78% of these social media ads use AI-generated videos for targeted campaigns, increasing viewer engagement by 45%. This potentially suggest that AI could be allowing companies to attract more customers and sales, due to more successful advertisement campaigns from these intuitive AI videos. Furthermore, it gives the companies a higher budget to spend on more worthwhile things, like improving their products, as dedicated Marketers are unneeded. Although, what indication is there that an increasing viewer engagement directly correlates to increase in sale or customers? Many people that view this AI – related content perhaps, watch these videos as they appear unusual. For example, during many videos where AI shows a human in them, their finger amount tends to change throughout. Resulting in a potential increase in viewer engagement, as this feeling of oddness when watching these videos can lead to curiosity, so people watch more. So, due to this potential lack of success of AI advertisement as they are similar in narrative as of today, and from less Marketers being employed, may lead to counterproductive decline in sales.
# Customer Support
Another major part of every company is the dealing with their consumers, to please them, retain their interest, and answer any queries or give solutions to problems they face involving a company’s product(s). How companies have saved money and valuable time when regarding these important issues, is by introducing The Chatbot, an AI driven tool to replace the human to solve such tedious problems. These Chatbots have helped companies to eliminate this stigma of long queue wait times, as they are available 24/7, handling common queries instantly. Allowing companies to either scrap large support teams, or designate them to more precarious issues, further pleasing the customer as these larger problems can be solved much quicker. An alternative benefit of Chatbots in customer support is that they are Multilingual. Beforehand, customers that didn’t converse in the same language as the operator had to either wait for a new one, increasing wait times, or not have their problems solved at all because of a lack of speakers in their language. Now, these Chatbots give the ease of opportunity to these foreign speakers, as Chatbots can switch between languages effortlessly. However, for more complex and abstract problems involving many steps, which most people need aid with, Chatbots frequently struggle with them. This means that human operators can’t entirely be replace yet, as many Chatbots end up relaying these issues to humans to solve them.  This is also due to the deficiency of emotional intelligence and nuances that Chatbots are able to understand. Nonetheless, these Chatbots are improving exponentially year by year, meaning as some point the human operator may become redundant depending if this progress doesn’t plateau.


---

## Key insights so far
- Point 1
- Point 2
- Point 3

---

## My reflection
This section is where I give my own opinion, link ideas together, or highlight what I agree/disagree with.  

---

## Next steps
In future posts, I’ll cover:
- [ ] A breakdown of Shrier’s main arguments  
- [ ] How AI interacts with maths concepts I’m studying  
- [ ] Small coding projects that test these ideas  
